# Script for Arrays.

- Today, we are going to be looking at arrays. You might notice that I don't seem to have any slides prepared. No, that not because I am lazy or disorganised, it's actually due to the fact that I want us to get used to using VS Code more and getting used to reading and writing code on a regular basis . So, let's get started. If you want to code along or take screenshots then that is absolutely fine. We will be having a little workshop after this lecture so that you can solidify all the things that we talk about though.
- Okay , so let's start off by looking at the HTML file that we created this morning. You might remember that, at the moment we are adding CSS by using the style tags and also adding some JavaScript using the script tags but it would be really good to be able to break these apart into different files so that's what we'll do!
- So, the first thing that I am going to do is to change our HTML file so that instead of having a style tag we will place all of this lovely CSS in a separate file. So the first thing I'm going to do is to make a new file called style.css and copy and paste my code into there. Now, I can add a link tag with an href to the new file that I've just created and also a rel=“stylesheet” property. Now, if we just refresh the page you should see that the title looks exactly the same even though the CSS is not in my HTML file.
- So , based on the fact that I can do this with CSS, let's see if we can do it with the JavaScript as well. I'm going to do is make a new file called main.js and place the code that we had in our script tags in there instead. Then, we're going to do pretty much the same thing as we did with the CSS by pasting the JavaScript into the new file, but in this case instead of using a link tag we are going to use a script tag . So I shall add script and then src=”index.js” to tell the HTML file to look in this location for any JavaScript that might be needed.
- This looks a lot better now! We now know that all the HTML is in one place, all of the CSS is in another and finally all of the JavaScript is in a third. This is what we would refer to as a separation of concerns e.g. everything is in a separate file depending on what it does.
- Let's get on with the main part of this lecture anyway. What is an array? Has anyone ever heard of this before? (Take ideas from the cohort and discuss what they think arrays are and how these might have been used).
- Simply speaking, arrays just lists like a todo list or a shopping list. Now the difference between arrays and objects is the fact that in an array, the older in which the data is place is really important. For example if I were to make a list of the top ten singles in the charts at the moment and put them in the wrong order, then this wouldn't really help us very much with it. This is different to an object which is literally just a bag of key value pairs that doesn't really matter what order you put them in. So let's have a go at writing some arrays.
- Write in main.js file. Let's imagine that I want to make a list of different coaches at the school of code. The obvious way to do this would be to create a variable for example coach1 and then set this to a person's name e.g “James”. however, this means that every single person that I'm going to write down needs to have a different variable and that's a real pain. This is where an array comes in. It's much easier to make a list of different people or numbers or whatever you want using an array instead of having to assign each one to their own particular variable.
- So let's do that. We'll call it coachNames and the way to signify that this is an array is by using square brackets. All we need to do now is to place each of those different strings into the array just like we did when we assigned them to each of the variables. And hey presto! We have managed to create an array with four different elements in it that takes one line instead of four. If we now see what that looks like when we open our HTML page, you can see in the dev tools, if we look for coachNames, we get the array showing up as a list. Yes, you can still look for the different variables that we made so, for example, if we look for coach1 then we still get “James“ back and we can do that with the other variables that we made. But what we haven't worked out how to do yet is how to get the different elements out of the array. So how do we do this?
- Well, very much like we learned with objects, the way to get out an element from an array is by using square brackets. So let's do that now. Can anyone tell me what you think you might need to put into the square brackets in order to get the 1st of the elements out? Take ideas from the cohort. Interestingly, computers really like starting at 0, so in this case in order to be able to access the first element, we need to write [0] and we get out "James”. We call this zero indexing.
- So the big question is why do arrays work a little bit like objects? Well, the interesting thing is if we were to type typeof(coachNames) what would you expect to see? Underneath the hood, arrays are actually objects and if we were to expand on the coachesNames array we would notice that it looks just like an object apart from the fact that the keys are just numbers and the values are whatever we placed into the array. You might remember earlier that when we were looking at the different primitives, objects and functions earlier on, there is no mention of arrays. So it raises very useful to be able to store information like key value pairs but where the keys are numerically ascending.
- So, can anyone tell me what I would need to do if I wanted to be able to console.log “Ben” from this array? I would need to use coachNames[2].
- Square brackets aren't only useful for being able to get information from an array but they can also allow you to be able to change it as well so, for example, if you wanted to change Ben to Chris for example then we could write coachNames[2] = “Chris” and this would reassign the third element to Chris.
- Okay pop quiz. What would happen if , using this array, we wrote coachNames[4]? what would we expect to come out from that? Take ideas from the cohort and discuss. In this case, it would return undefined because there was nothing there. However if we were to write coachNames[4] = “Max”, then we would be able to reassign that fifth element to Max.
- Why else are arrays great then? As we mentioned, an array is actually an object so, because of this, it also has different properties on it and one of those is .length. this means I could write coachNames.length and it would be able to tell me how many different elements there are in that particular array . Why is this important? Well, what if I wanted to find some way of printing out all of the different elements in the array. I could write console.log(coachNames[0]) and then change the number for each one but then we're getting back to the same problem of repetition. How else could I do it? Using a for loop.
- Get member of the cohort to complete a for loop to print all of the different names in the array.

```
for (let i = 0; i < coachNames.length; i++) {
  console.log(coachNames[i]);
}
```

- And the good thing here is that it doesn't matter if we add any more names to the array because it is always looking for the array.length in the for loop so it will always keep on printing out every element in the array.
- Are there any questions about arrays or anything we have gone through?
